Sentiment in 10-Qs reports are recognized as being an important determinant of future financial performance. The aim of this study is to examine the effect of the sentiment on the stock prices. I have evaluated the sentiment in the quarter reports of U.S. companies using the NLTK approach. NLTK stands for ‘Natural Language Processing Toolkit’. This is one of the core libraries to perform Sentiment Analysis or any text-based 'ML" (Machine Learning) Projects. 

How is Sentiment Analysis Used? Usually, sentiment analysis works best on text that has a subjective context than on text with only an objective context. Objective text usually depicts some normal statements or facts without expressing any emotion, feelings, or mood. Subjective text contains text that is usually expressed by a human having typical moods, emotions, and feelings.

What was my overall approach? Overview of approach: My first step was to download all of the raw texts (10-Qs submitted) by organisations dated from the start of 2016 onwards. Secondly, I tokenized and removed all ‘Stop-Words’ ((a list of words that has no ‘significant’ meaning such as ‘and’, ‘the’, ‘or’ etc.) and tested the frequency of most common appearing words. Each 10-Q’s output are saved as Dataframe and ‘pickled’ and saved. Utilising Matplotlib graph generator, the files are ‘unpicked’ and the data displayed in the form of graphs.

What are NLTK, Pickle and Matplotlib? NLTK is a powerful Python package that provides a set of diverse natural languages algorithms. It is free, opensource, easy to use, large community, and well documented. NLTK consists of the most common algorithms such as tokenizing, part-of-speech tagging, stemming, sentiment analysis, topic segmentation, and named entity recognition. NLTK helps the computer to analysis, preprocess, and understand the written text. Python pickle module is used for serializing and de-serializing a Python object structure. Any object in Python can be pickled so that it can be saved on disk. What pickle does is that it “serializes” the object first before writing it to file. Pickling is a way to convert a python object (list, dict, etc.) into a character stream.  Matplotlib is a plotting library for the Python programming language and its numerical mathematics extension NumPy.
Will Sentiment Analysis ever be 100% accurate, or close? Probably not, but that is not meant to be a bad thing. This will not be because people aren’t smart enough to eventually make computers that really understand language. Instead, this is really just plain impossible, seeing as how it’s rarely the case that 80% of people agree on the sentiment of text. — http://sentdex.com/sentiment-analysis/

Sources: Samuel W.K. Chan, Mickey W.C. Chong (2016) Sentiment Analysis in financial texts, Department of Decision Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, Published by Elsevier Ltd Mehran Azimi and Anup Agrawal (2019) Is Positive Sentiment in Corporate Annual Reports Informative? Evidence of Deep Learning, University of Alabama, Culverhouse College of Business Jimmy SJ. Ren, Huizhong Ge (2013) Effective Sentiment Analysis of Corporate Financial Reports, Thirty Fourth International Conference on Information Systems, Milan Sriniketh J (2021) Sentiment Analysis using NLTK - A Practical Approach, Data Science Blogathon

© 2021. All Rights Reserved to Elizabeth Lim
